docs/plan.md, before:

# Implementation Plan for WhatsApp Archive Browse


This document outlines the next phase of development focusing on implementing incremental processing, efficient file handling, and ZIP support. For context, see:
- [technical-documentation.md](./technical-documentation.md) for current architecture
- [chat-format.md](./chat-format.md) for message parsing approach
- [testing-approach.md](./testing-approach.md) for testing strategy

## 1. Model Refactoring: ChatData2
Fundamental changes to support incremental processing and efficient file handling.

### 1.1 New Types and Properties
Core changes to [`chat_data.py`](../src/chat_data.py):
- Create `chat_data2.py` with suffixed type names (`ChatData2`, `ChatFile2`, etc.)
- Implement `ChatFileID` type for unique file identification
- Add file existence tracking and split path handling in `ChatFile2`
- Remove optional fields from `ChatFile2` where possible
- Convert file references to use `ChatFileID`

### 1.2 Message Structure Updates
- Remove embedded file data from `Message2`
- Keep core fields: timestamp, sender, content, year
- Convert file references to `ChatFileID`
- Remove HTML path (moving to `OutputFile2`)

### 1.3 Dependencies in OutputFile
Design new `OutputFile2` type for tracking dependencies:
```python
class OutputFile2:
    media_dependencies: Dict[str, Optional[ChatFileID]]  # basename -> ID
    chat_dependencies: List[ChatFileID]                  # _chat.txt files
    css_dependency: ChatFileID                          # CSS resource
```

### 1.4 Code Migration Strategy
- Keep old and new implementations parallel during development
- Use suffixed names to track progress
- Plan final rename operation to remove suffixes

## 2. Virtual File System (VFS)

### 2.1 File Information Cache
- Design efficient file lookup structure
- Implement ID generation (path + separator + size + separator + mtime)
- Create indices for quick file location

### 2.2 Multiple Access Patterns
Support multiple lookup methods:
- By relative path within input/zip
- By `ChatFileID`
- By filename (for media files)

### 2.3 ZIP File Integration
- Scan ZIP contents only when needed
- Cache ZIP file information
- Abstract file access for regular and ZIP files

## 3. Incremental Processing System
Updates required across multiple components:
- [`input_scanner.py`](../src/input_scanner.py): VFS integration
- [`data_comparator.py`](../src/data_comparator.py): Change detection
- [`metadata_updater.py`](../src/metadata_updater.py): State persistence
- [`html_generator.py`](../src/html_generator.py): Smart regeneration
- [`main.py`](../src/main.py): Flow coordination
- [`output_checker.py`](../src/output_checker.py): Metadata loading
- [`parser.py`](../src/parser.py): File abstraction

### 3.1 Change Detection
- Track file dependencies for each output file
- Detect changes through `ChatFileID` comparison
- Handle missing files gracefully

### 3.2 Smart Regeneration
- Only regenerate affected HTML files
- Copy only changed media files
- Preserve existing content when possible

### 3.3 State Management
- Merge old and new metadata
- Handle file relocation
- Track missing files

## 4. Testing and Verification

### 4.1 New Integration Tests
Focus on complex scenarios:
- Incremental updates with file changes
- ZIP file handling
- Missing file handling
- Multiple overlapping backups

### 4.2 Reference Output Updates
- Create new reference outputs for incremental cases
- Add ZIP file test cases
- Document expected behavior for each test case

## 5. Final Implementation Details

### 5.1 Clean-up Tasks
- Remove locale parameter (now using heuristics)
- Update error messages and logging
- Add HTML improvements (link detection)

### 5.2 Documentation Updates
- Update [technical-documentation.md](./technical-documentation.md) with VFS and incremental processing details
- Update [chat-format.md](./chat-format.md) if needed
- Add examples for incremental usage to README.md
- Document ZIP file support and new features
- Review and update [testing-approach.md](./testing-approach.md) if needed

### 5.3 Production Testing
- Test with large real-world data
- Measure and optimize performance
- Handle edge cases discovered in testing

## Notes on Implementation Approach

### Dependency Tracking
The core of incremental processing relies on careful dependency tracking:
- Each output file knows its exact dependencies
- Dependencies are tracked by `ChatFileID` to detect changes
- Missing files are tracked but don't trigger unnecessary regeneration

### Change Detection Strategy
To minimize unnecessary work:
- Compare file IDs instead of content
- Track only essential dependencies
- Handle relocated files without regeneration
- Preserve existing content when dependencies haven't changed

### Future Considerations
Potential enhancements after core implementation:
- Two-party chat detection and styling
- More sophisticated link handling
- Performance optimizations for large archives

Commit message:

Add idea to improve program structure to plan.md

docs/plan.md, after:

# Implementation Plan for WhatsApp Archive Browse


This document outlines the next phase of development focusing on implementing incremental processing, efficient file handling, and ZIP support. For context, see:
- [technical-documentation.md](./technical-documentation.md) for current architecture
- [chat-format.md](./chat-format.md) for message parsing approach
- [testing-approach.md](./testing-approach.md) for testing strategy



## Modification to plan below

We will include plan steps to split the the current

|"Input Directory Scan" into 3 new stages:

- new stage 1, Input VFS Scan
  - will take the input_files part of the potential Output Directory Check stage
  - will merge new discovered input files to the old ones. ChatFile2 should have flags indicating whether the file came from the old output dir JSON and whether it was also still present input.

- new stage 2, _chat.txt parsing and message dedup
  - Simply parse all new _chat.txt files.
  - Sort messages for modified chats in the order of the timstamps of the _chat.txt files (this can also be done for messages for which the original _chat.txt has disappeared)
  - Remove consecutive duplicate messages in a single pass per chat that was processed in this stage

- new stage 3, media file locating
  - Identify missing (None) media files in the OutputFile2 dictionaries
  - Try to locate missing ones in the VFS (looking for a file that has a flag that it is present in the input)
    - As currently, prefer ones in the same folder as the _chat.txt
    - Otherwise any file with same base name in any folder / zip


## 1. Model Refactoring: ChatData2
Fundamental changes to support incremental processing and efficient file handling.

### 1.1 New Types and Properties
Core changes to [`chat_data.py`](../src/chat_data.py):
- Create `chat_data2.py` with suffixed type names (`ChatData2`, `ChatFile2`, etc.)
- Implement `ChatFileID` type for unique file identification
- Add file existence tracking and split path handling in `ChatFile2`
- Remove optional fields from `ChatFile2` where possible
- Convert file references to use `ChatFileID`

### 1.2 Message Structure Updates
- Remove embedded file data from `Message2`
- Keep core fields: timestamp, sender, content, year
- Convert file references to `ChatFileID`
- Remove HTML path (moving to `OutputFile2`)

### 1.3 Dependencies in OutputFile
Design new `OutputFile2` type for tracking dependencies:
```python
class OutputFile2:
    media_dependencies: Dict[str, Optional[ChatFileID]]  # basename -> ID
    chat_dependencies: List[ChatFileID]                  # _chat.txt files
    css_dependency: ChatFileID                          # CSS resource
```

### 1.4 Code Migration Strategy
- Keep old and new implementations parallel during development
- Use suffixed names to track progress
- Plan final rename operation to remove suffixes

## 2. Virtual File System (VFS)

### 2.1 File Information Cache
- Design efficient file lookup structure
- Implement ID generation (path + separator + size + separator + mtime)
- Create indices for quick file location

### 2.2 Multiple Access Patterns
Support multiple lookup methods:
- By relative path within input/zip
- By `ChatFileID`
- By filename (for media files)

### 2.3 ZIP File Integration
- Scan ZIP contents only when needed
- Cache ZIP file information
- Abstract file access for regular and ZIP files

## 3. Incremental Processing System
Updates required across multiple components:
- [`input_scanner.py`](../src/input_scanner.py): VFS integration
- [`data_comparator.py`](../src/data_comparator.py): Change detection
- [`metadata_updater.py`](../src/metadata_updater.py): State persistence
- [`html_generator.py`](../src/html_generator.py): Smart regeneration
- [`main.py`](../src/main.py): Flow coordination
- [`output_checker.py`](../src/output_checker.py): Metadata loading
- [`parser.py`](../src/parser.py): File abstraction

### 3.1 Change Detection
- Track file dependencies for each output file
- Detect changes through `ChatFileID` comparison
- Handle missing files gracefully

### 3.2 Smart Regeneration
- Only regenerate affected HTML files
- Copy only changed media files
- Preserve existing content when possible

### 3.3 State Management
- Merge old and new metadata
- Handle file relocation
- Track missing files

## 4. Testing and Verification

### 4.1 New Integration Tests
Focus on complex scenarios:
- Incremental updates with file changes
- ZIP file handling
- Missing file handling
- Multiple overlapping backups

### 4.2 Reference Output Updates
- Create new reference outputs for incremental cases
- Add ZIP file test cases
- Document expected behavior for each test case

## 5. Final Implementation Details

### 5.1 Clean-up Tasks
- Remove locale parameter (now using heuristics)
- Update error messages and logging
- Add HTML improvements (link detection)

### 5.2 Documentation Updates
- Update [technical-documentation.md](./technical-documentation.md) with VFS and incremental processing details
- Update [chat-format.md](./chat-format.md) if needed
- Add examples for incremental usage to README.md
- Document ZIP file support and new features
- Review and update [testing-approach.md](./testing-approach.md) if needed

### 5.3 Production Testing
- Test with large real-world data
- Measure and optimize performance
- Handle edge cases discovered in testing

## Notes on Implementation Approach

### Dependency Tracking
The core of incremental processing relies on careful dependency tracking:
- Each output file knows its exact dependencies
- Dependencies are tracked by `ChatFileID` to detect changes
- Missing files are tracked but don't trigger unnecessary regeneration

### Change Detection Strategy
To minimize unnecessary work:
- Compare file IDs instead of content
- Track only essential dependencies
- Handle relocated files without regeneration
- Preserve existing content when dependencies haven't changed

### Future Considerations
Potential enhancements after core implementation:
- Two-party chat detection and styling
- More sophisticated link handling
- Performance optimizations for large archives
